Maven - it is a popular open-source build tool that the Apache Group developed for building, publishing, and deploying several projects. Maven is written in Java. The tool is used to build and manage any Java-based project. Maven is based on Project Object Model (POM) and focuses on simplification and standardization of the building process. Every Java project requires certain dependencies, which are automatically downloaded when running a Maven build. This simplifies everyday tasks for Java developers and helps them with their projects. Maven helps retrieve the correct JAR files for each project. If you want to download dependencies, you no longer need to visit each software's official website. It can be quickly done now by visiting "mvnrepository.com". we can download project dependency using maven. (Ex - spring boot, hibernate, Kafka, redis, mail, Junit, security).
During the process, Maven takes care of the following elements: Builds, Dependencies, Reports, Distribution, Releases, Mailing list

maven installation -
1. download & install java s/w JDK & JRE
JDK used to develop s/w & JRE provides platform/environment which is used to run java programs

2. set environment variables
start menu search for environment variable → system properties → environment variable → System variable → new → variable name (JAVA-HOME) & variable value (paste JDK path from c drive) save & then go to path → click on new & paste the java bin path.

3. download Apache maven (binary zip archive) & extract all

4. set environment variables
start menu search for environment variable → system properties → environment variable → System variable → new → variable name (MAVEN-HOME) & variable value (paste maven path from c drive) save & then go to path → click on new & paste the maven bin path.


Five primary and most significant concepts of Maven:
1. Project Object Model (POM)

•	Project Object Model (POM) refers to the XML files with all the information regarding project and configuration details

•	It contains the project description, as well as details regarding the versioning and configuration management of the project

•	The XML file is in the project home directory. Maven searches for the POM in the current directory when any given task needs to be executed

2. Dependencies and Repositories

•	Dependencies refer to the Java libraries required for the project. Repositories refer to the directories of packaged JAR files.

•	If the dependencies are not present in your local repository, then Maven downloads them from a central repository and stores them in the local repository.

3. Build Life Cycles, Phases and Goals

•	This consists of a sequence of build phases, and each build phase consists of a series of goals

•	Each goal is responsible for a particular task

•	When a process is executed, all related to that phase and its plugins are also compiled

4. Build Profiles

•	This refers to the set of configuration values required to build a project using different configurations

•	Different build profiles are added to the POM files when enabling different builds

•	A build profile helps in customizing the build for different environments

5. Build Plugins

•	A Maven plugin refers to the group of goals that may or may not be in the same phase

•	The plugins are used to perform a specific goal

•	Maven has its standard plugins that can be used. If desired, users can also implement their own in Java

What is a Maven Artifact?

Maven Artifact refers to a file, usually a JAR that gets deployed to a Maven repository. The tool creates one or more artifacts, such as a compiled JAR and a source JAR. Every artifact has its groupID, an artifact ID, and a version string. These three together identify the artifact. 

The full name of a project in Maven includes: <GroupId>: <artifactId>: <version>

e.g. : org.apache.maven: maven: 2.0.1

•	groupid represents company name or project name.

•	artifactID represents project name or project module name.

•	packaging represents how we want to package our java application (jar or war).

What is a Maven Archetype?

Maven Archetype refers to a Maven plugin allow user to create a project structure as per its template. These archetypes are just project templates that are generated by Maven when any new project is created.

•	maven-archetype-quickstart : It represents java standalone application.

•	maven-archetype-webapp : It provides java web application.


Maven clean - is a plugin as the name suggests, that approaches to clean the files and directories generated by Maven at the time of its build. The plugin removes the target folder that contains all the class files, docs, JAR files.   # mvn clean

Maven compile - is used to compile project source code. Compiled Code is stored in target folder. #mvn compile

Maven test - is used to execute unit test code of our application.   # mvn test

Maven package - is used to generate JAR or WAR file for application based on packaging type available in pom.xml   # mvn package

Maven install - is used to install our project as dependency in maven local repository.   #mvn install

Creating standalone application using maven -
mvn archetype:generate -DgroupId=in.it -DartifactId=maven-app -DarchetypeArtifactId=maven-archetype-quickstart -DinteractiveMode=false

Creating web application using maven –
mvn archetype:generate -DarchetypeArtifactId=maven-archetype-webapp -DgroupId=in.it -DartifactId=01-maven-web-app -DinteractiveMode=false

Create a new folder (javas) → Open cmd in that folder → copy command of web application & paste it into cmd
It will create a src & pom.xml file in that folder. After both the files are created open git bash in that location and initialize that folder & push the contains of that folder to the GitHub repo.

